Where there are politics there are political
parties, factions, and sub-factions which
shape the world, or in this case, the galaxy
through movements, legislation, and reformations.
These political parties and factions also
give us a better understanding of what the
common people of the galaxy believe and what
they want from their public servants, as well
as what issues they agree and disagree on.
In Star Wars there are over 100 political
parties, factions and sub factions recorded.
Because most of them are pretty vague in their
descriptions and only appear once or twice
in isolated events, we’ll instead go over
only the major ones from the galactic senate
within each era.
First we have the main political factions
during the Republic prior to the separatist
crisis and eventual clone wars.
The two major factions of this time were the
Core Faction and the Rim Faction.
The Core Faction composed of senators who
were from the wealthy, Human dominated planets
and systems of the Core worlds sector of the
galaxy.
Most of its members were Humans, and the faction
worked towards increasing the Galactic Republic’s
central government as a means for it to have
greater control over the outskirts of the
galaxy, especially the Outer rim.
A lot of its policies involved taxing and
exploiting poor worlds of their resources
and bringing all the wealth to the center
of the galaxy, while also implementing and
expanding strict regulations and laws on free
trade in these same outer regions.
Notable members of this faction were Finis
Valorum and Bail Antilles.
The Rim Faction was its biggest opposition.
The Rim Faction composed mainly of non-Human
senators who represented the worlds and systems
from the Mid Rim and Outer Rim.
Once mega corporations were allowed to be
represented as their own separate entities
within the senate, most of them joined the
Rim Faction, including the Trade Federation
and Techno Union.
The Rim Faction was against the Republic’s
central government from gaining more power
and they fought for less regulations and taxation.
They were also for open and free trade markets
among their respective outlying systems.
Major members of this faction were Orn Free
Taa and Nute Gunray.
Actually Palpatine was nominated by the Rim
Faction during his run for Supreme Chancellorship.
Although he wasn’t apart of their faction,
Palpatine did side with them on many policies
due to Naboo being in the Mid Rim.
They picked him because he was independent
and had the best chance of winning when compared
to most of the other senators within the faction
itself.
But Palpatine only used the Rim Faction as
a means to gain power, as after he became
Supreme Chancellor he began to side more with
the Core Faction and their policies.
When the Separatist Crisis started, many of
the Rim Faction’s leaders and senators left
the Republic and joined the forming Confederacy
of Independent Systems.
In response to the Rim Faction’s members
leaving the Republic, a new faction was created
called the Loyalists Committee.
It included Senators who were completely devoted
in preserving the Republic and wished to keep
the galaxy united.
Palpatine actually found this faction, promoting
its creation as a means to combat corruption
and forming peace talks with disgruntled senators
who had left the Republic.
However he of course manipulated it to instead
increase tensions between both sides which
helped accelerate the start of the clone wars.
Bail Organa and Padme Amidala were notable
members of this faction.
We also have the smaller Militarist faction
within the senate around this time.
They were senators who supported the idea
of the Republic rebuilding its army and navy
and for it to become a military power once
again.
Although originally they didn’t have much
support, they began to grow in size once more
and more conflicts began to arise in the outer
rim that the Jedi couldn’t solve, as well
as when they began to embrace Humanist superiority
ideals.
They were one of the biggest supporters of
the Military creation act which created the
Grand Army of the Republic and authorized
the use of the Clone Army.
A notable member of the Militarist faction
was Ranulph Tarkin.
During the Clone Wars many new factions were
formed as a response to the ongoing galactic
war.
One of the major factions was the Council
of Neutral Systems.
They were senators and representatives who
wished to have their worlds and systems be
neutral in the conflict between the Republic
and the Separatists during the Clone Wars.
Over 1,500 star systems were apart of this
organization, and it was led by Queen Satine
Kryze of Mandalore.
The other major faction to arise during the
clone wars was the delegation of 2000.
It was made up of senators and representatives
who opposed Palpatine’s increase in power
and abuse of emergency powers.
They feared that he was trying to undermine
the Senate’s authority while in turn giving
himself as much power as possible.
They wished to protect the democratic elements
of the Republic and to return its state back
to how it was before Palpatine took office.
Notable members of this faction were Bail
Organa, Mon Mothma, Jar Jar Binks and Padme
Amidala.
Once the Empire formed, 63 members of the
Delegation of 2000 were arrested for suspected
treasonous actions, which resulted in half
of its members to leave the faction out of
fear.
During the Empire’s reign, members of this
faction were the biggest opponents of Emperor
Palpatine, with some of them eventually forming
the Rebel Alliance.
In contrast to the Delegation of 2000, there
was the New Order Party within the Imperial
senate which consisted of senators that supported
Emperor Palpatine and all of his actions.
However it was eventually disbanded, along
with every other political faction and party,
after the Imperial Senate was dissolved around
19 years after the Empire was created.
In the New Star Wars Trilogy, the New Republic
is created after the fall of the Galactic
Empire.
With the New Republic came with a new galactic
senate which had two major political factions:
the Centrists and the Populists.
The Centrists advocated for the expansion
of the New Republic’s central government
and for a more connected galaxy.
Many senators of this faction came from the
wealthier worlds of the galaxy.
They supported more funding for the New Republic
military and even defended the old Galactic
Empire to some extent.
Actually there was a whole sub faction of
Centrists that even admired the old empire
and wished to reimplement, in their words,
the policies that actually worked from the
old empire.
They even fought for the New Republic’s
military to look more like the Imperial military
from the past, as a means to give it a greater
image of power and unity.
Despite their call for a more unified and
connected galaxy, some Centrists believed
that individual planets should take more responsibility
on fixing their own problems and to not greatly
depend on the New Republic’s assistance
for every little issue they may have.
They also supported free trade among worlds.
The Populists on the other hand were opposed
of strengthening the New Republic’s central
government and its military.
They believed in each planet being allowed
more independence and given more freedom on
its decisions on how their people should live.
There was actually two extreme sub factions
within the populists.
One sub faction wanted to essentially make
the entire Republic into a direct democracy
by allowing the general public to directly
vote on major decisions within the senate,
which would mean tens of trillions of citizens
would be allowed to vote on major senate bills.
The other sub faction instead wanted to completely
dissolve the senate and give full sovereignty
to all the planets, giving them full independence
and freedom to do as they pleased.
Leia Organa was a major member of the Populist
faction, though she was not a member of either
extreme sub factions.
However her political career in the senate
was destroyed after it became public knowledge
that she was related to Darth Vader.
And those are the major political factions
and parties of the Star Wars galaxy across
the 3 main eras.
Based on the summaries we gave of each faction,
which one would you guys most likely support?
Let us know in the comments below!